.\" Manpage for Affine
.TH affine 1 "September 27, 2025" "1.0" "Modern variations of Caesar cipher"
.SH NAME
affine \- The Affine mono-alphabetic cipher.
.SH SYNOPSIS
affine [OPTIONS] "text to encrypt/decrypt"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Affine is a monoalphabetic cipher that uses a single letter key based on a
simple linear formula f(x) = Ax + B. 
   It is by no means a replacement for today's secure ciphers, but it is
good enough for  
.B some
day-to-day uses and against the casual thief or document peeper. In particular,
this software does not rely on ASCII alphabets like most out there, it uses
UTF8 Unicode and works perfectly with multi-byte characters used in foreign
alphabets.
  Additionally, it is possible to enhance the security by adding a secondary
or slave alphabet that supplements the letters with space, symbols and some
punctuation.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
-demo
Run a demonstration of round trip encryption and decryption with the
chosen alphabet and optionally a chosen secondary alphabet.
.TP
-version
Outputs program and selected algorithm versions.
.TP
-help
Show help information.
.TP
-alpha alphabet_name
Character set for letters: english (default), spanish/latin, german, greek, cyrillic.
.TP
-num
.I N|A|H|E
Select a secondary/slave alphabet to use: 
.B N 
for none (default), 
.B A 
for Arabic, 
.B H 
for Hindi or
.B E 
for extended which contains digits, space and some symbols.
.TP
-A value
The A coefficient is an integer coprime of the alphabet length.
.TP
-B value
The B coefficient which can be freely chosen. However, its effective
range of values is limited by the length of the alphabet.
.TP
-coprime
For the chosen alphabet's length, list the valid coprimes.
.TP
-N value
Set the alphabet length for listing coprimes, only used with -coprime option.
.TP
-tabula
For the chosen encryption parameters and alphabet, print the substitution table.
.TP
-ngram 2|3|4|5
Use NGram format for the encryption output. Ignored for decryption.
.TP
-d
Sets execution mode to
.I decryption
instead of the default which is encryption.

.SH EXIT status
.TP
0
Successful execution.
.TP
1+ 
Error code.

.SH SEE ALSO
bellaso, vigenere, caesarx and tabula.

.SH AUTHOR
Lord of Scripts <lordofscripts@users.noreply.github.com>