.\"Modified from man(1) of FreeBSD, the NetBSD mdoc.template, and mdoc.samples.
.\"See Also:
.\"man mdoc.samples for a complete listing of options
.\"man mdoc for the short list of editing options
.\"/usr/share/misc/mdoc.template
.Dd 26/10/25               \" DATE
.Dt bellaso      \" Program name and manual section number
.Os Linux
.Sh NAME                 \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm bellaso,
.\" Use .Nm macro to designate other names for the documented program.
.NM caesarx
.Nd Bellaso polialphabetic cipher but made suitable for modern-day applications.
.Sh SYNOPSIS             \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm
.Op Fl demo|-help|-F|-d              \" [-abcd]
.Op Fl secret Ar 'Password'          \" [-a path]
.Op Fl num Ar letter
.Op Fl ngram Ar size
.Ar 'text to process'                \" Underlined argument - use .Ar anywhere to underline
.Sh DESCRIPTION          \" Section Header - required - don't modify
The Bellaso cipher was invented by Giovan Battista Bellaso, born in 1505. He 
published it in 1553 in his 
.Ar 'La Cifra del Signore Giovan Battista Bellaso'.


This cipher is based on the Caesar cipher, therefore it is a substitution
cipher. However, unlike Caesar's, this is a polyalphabetic cipher. Rather than
using a single letter (or key) to encrypt, the Bellaso cipher uses a
.Ar password
or 
.Ar secret phrase .


The secret is used for substitution, except it is repeated over the input
message until its end. Therefore, each letter in the secret is used to 
encrypt/decrypt the corresponding input letter to which it is paired.

Each of the letters in the 
.Ar secret
is paired only to an input letter that is present in the primary 
.Ar (-alpha)
or secondary
.Ar (-num)
alphabet. The letters of the secret are therefore never paired over parts
of the input that cannot be encoded/decoded.


The 
.Nm 
program is equivalent to executing the
.Ar caesarx
program with the 
.Ar -variant bellaso
command-line argument.


.Pp
Flags and their descriptions that apply to ALL variants:
.Bl -tag -width -indent  \" Differs from above in tag removed
.It Fl help                 \"-a flag as a list item
General command help
.It Fl demo
Run a demonstration of Bellaso encryption/decryption
.It Fl ngram
The size (2..5) of the output group for encrypted output
.It Fl alpha
Selects the built-in language alphabet
.It Fl num
Specify an optional secondary alphabet: N|A|H|E 
.It Fl F
Indicates the free argument is a filename rather than text.
.El                      \" Ends the list
The following flags are Bellaso-specific:

.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It Fl secret
A password or phrase that would be used to encrypt/decrypt
.El

The following built-in language/alphabets are supported via the 
.Ar -alpha
flag:

.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It english
(default) The English alphabet composed entirely of ASCII
.It latin 
Common to all/most languages from the Latin family
.It spanish
Same as latin.
.It german
The German alphabet
.It greek
The Greek alphabet
.It cyrillic
The cyrillic alphabet
.It russian
Same as cyrillic.
.It ukrainian
Same as cyrillic.
.El


As indicated above, by default the cipher only processes the letter characters
in the primary alphabet selected with 
.Ar -alpha .
But to increase security and usability, it is possible to add a secondary
alphabet to complement the primary. These are the four numeric/symbol alphabets
that can be selected with the 
.Ar -num 
flag:

.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It N
(default) "None", just encrypt the letters in the primary alphabet.
.It A
"Arabic" numbers: 0123456789
.It H
"Hindi" numerals: ٠١٢٣٤٥٦٧٨٩
.It E
"Extended" comprises the "Arabic" numbers, space, and these: #$%+-@
.El

.Pp
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT      \" May not be needed
.\" .Bl -tag -width "ENV_VAR_1" -indent \" ENV_VAR_1 is width of the string ENV_VAR_1
.\" .It Ev ENV_VAR_1
.\" Description of ENV_VAR_1
.\" .It Ev ENV_VAR_2
.\" Description of ENV_VAR_2
.\" .El
.Sh FILES                \" File used or created by the topic of the man page
.Bl -tag -width "/Users/joeuser/Library/really_long_file_name" -compact
.It Pa /usr/bin/bellaso
Symbolic link to the caesarx application
.It Pa /usr/bin/caesarx
The actual application that supports all Caesar variants
.It Pa ~/.config/coralys/caesarx/caesarx.yml
User configuration file
.It Pa /usr/share/doc/caesarx/LICENSE.md 
The software license
.It Pa /usr/share/doc/caesarx/* 
All documentation
.El                      \" Ends the list
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS       \" May not be needed
.\" .Bl -diag
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .El
.Sh EXAMPLES
caesarx -variant bellaso -secret "password" "plain text"

bellaso -secret "password" "Plain text to encrypt"

bellaso -secret "password" -d "ihak eg r wtsl"

cat "ihak eg r wtsl" | bellaso -secret "password" -d

bellaso -secret "password" -num E -F plain_text_file.txt

.Sh SEE ALSO
.\" List links in ascending order by section, alphabetically within a section.
.\" Please do not reference files that do not exist without filing a bug report
.Xr caesarx 1 ,
.Xr tabularecta 1 ,
.Xr affine 1 ,
.Xr vigenere 1 ,
.Xr didimus 1 ,
.Xr fibonacci 1 ,
.Xr caesarx 5
.\" .Sh BUGS              \" Document known, unremedied bugs
.Sh HISTORY           \" Document history if command behaves in a unique manner
.\" List application history
.Bl -tag -width -indent  \" Begins a tagged list
.It 27-Sep-2025                \" Each item preceded by .It macro
Initial version supporting multiple Caesar variants
.It 14-Oct-2025
Added support for Text file encryption/decryption
.It 25-Oct-2025
Added support for Binary file encryption/decryption
.El                      \" Ends the list
.Sh AUTHOR
Didimo Grimaldo <lordofscripts@users.noreply.github.com>

