.\" Manpage for caesarx
.TH caesarx 1 "September 27, 2025" "1.0" "Modern variations of Caesar cipher"
.SH NAME
caesarx \- Modern variations of Caesar, Bellaso & Vigenère ciphers.
.SH SYNOPSIS
caesarx [OPTIONS] "text to encrypt/decrypt"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Revisiting ancient ciphers like Caesar as well as XIX century variations
like Bellaso and Vigenère but making them stronger and more suitable for
modern-day use. This application is a modernized version that is stronger
against attacks; However, keep in mind that none of these Caesar and variants
thereof are suitable for modern-day security. 
   At the same time, they are good enough for 
.B some
day-to-day uses and against the casual thief or document peeper. In particular,
this software does not rely on ASCII alphabets like most out there, it uses
UTF8 Unicode and works perfectly with multi-byte characters used in foreign
alphabets.
  Additionally, it is possible to enhance the security by adding a secondary
or slave alphabet that supplements the letters with space, symbols and some
punctuation.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
-demo
Run a demonstration of round trip encryption and decryption with the
chosen alphabet and optionally a chosen secondary alphabet.
.TP
-list
Lists the cipher variants supported by the program.
.TP
-version
Outputs program and selected algorithm versions.
.TP
-help
Show help information.
.TP
-variant cipher_variant
Sets the cipher type: caesar (default), didimus, fibonacci, bellaso or vigenere.
.TP
-alpha alphabet_name
Character set for letters: english (default), spanish/latin, german, greek, cyrillic.
.TP
-num
.I N|A|H|E
Select a secondary/slave alphabet to use: 
.B N 
for none (default), 
.B A 
for Arabic, 
.B H 
for Hindi or
.B E 
for extended which contains digits, space and some symbols.
.TP
-key letter
A one character encryption key used in caesar, didimus and fibonacci. Known as Main key.
.TP
-offset value
Numeric offset value with respect to Main Key. Only applies to 
.B didimus
cipher.
.TP
-secret  'secret'
A password or phrase used as secret. This applies only to 
.B Bellaso
and
.B Vigenère
ciphers.
.TP
-ngram 2|3|4|5
Use NGram format for the encryption output. Ignored for decryption.
.TP
-d
Sets execution mode to
.I decryption
instead of the default which is encryption.

.SH EXIT status
.TP
0
Successful execution.
.TP
1+ 
Error code.

.SH SEE ALSO
bellaso, vigenere, affine and tabula.
The first two are aliases for caesarx, but 
.B affine
and
.B tabula
are separate standalone programs.

.SH AUTHOR
Lord of Scripts <lordofscripts@users.noreply.github.com>