.\"Modified from man(1) of FreeBSD, the NetBSD mdoc.template, and mdoc.samples.
.\"See Also:
.\"man mdoc.samples for a complete listing of options
.\"man mdoc for the short list of editing options
.\"/usr/share/misc/mdoc.template
.Dd 26/10/25               \" DATE
.Dt didimus      \" Program name and manual section number
.Os Linux
.Sh NAME                 \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm didimus,
.\" Use .Nm macro to designate other names for the documented program.
.NM caesarx
.Nd Didimus polialphabetic cipher but made suitable for modern-day applications.
.Sh SYNOPSIS             \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm
.Op Fl demo|-help|-F|-d              \" [-abcd]
.Op Fl secret Ar 'Password'          \" [-a path]
.Op Fl num Ar letter
.Op Fl ngram Ar size
.Ar 'text to process'                \" Underlined argument - use .Ar anywhere to underline
.Sh DESCRIPTION          \" Section Header - required - don't modify
The Didimus cipher was created as a fun experiment by engineer Dídimo Grimaldo.
Despite its simplicity it still fulfills certain use cases without the pitfalls
of the Caesar cipher.


This cipher is based on the Caesar cipher, therefore it is a substitution
cipher. However, unlike Caesar's, this is a polyalphabetic cipher. Rather than
using a single letter (or key) to encrypt, the Didimus cipher uses a
.Ar key
like in Caesar but an additional parameter named 
.Ar offset .
This offset, when added (modulo alphabet length) to the shift represented by
the 
.Ar key ,
creates a secondary key. The main key is used for even characters, whereas the
secondary key is used for odd characters. 
.PP


The keys are used for substitution but only over characters that can be encrypted,
i.e. characters that appear in either the master or chained alphabets. Likewise,
the attribute "odd" or "even" position is derived only based on the encodeable
characters; therefore, it the resulting position takes into consideration how
many characters have been skipped.


The 
.Nm 
program is equivalent to executing the
.Ar caesarx
program with the 
.Ar -variant didimus
command-line argument.


.Pp
Flags and their descriptions that apply to ALL variants:
.Bl -tag -width -indent  \" Differs from above in tag removed
.It Fl help                 \"-a flag as a list item
General command help
.It Fl demo
Run a demonstration of Bellaso encryption/decryption
.It Fl ngram
The size (2..5) of the output group for encrypted output
.It Fl alpha
Selects the built-in language alphabet
.It Fl num
Specify an optional secondary alphabet: N|A|H|E 
.It Fl F
Indicates the free argument is a filename rather than text.
.El                      \" Ends the list

The following flags are Didimus-specific:
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It Fl key
The main key, a single letter from the encodeable character set.
.It Fl offset
An offset added to the main key to create a secondary key.
.El

The following built-in language/alphabets are supported via the 
.Ar -alpha
flag:

.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It english
(default) The English alphabet composed entirely of ASCII
.It latin 
Common to all/most languages from the Latin family
.It spanish
Same as latin.
.It german
The German alphabet
.It greek
The Greek alphabet
.It cyrillic
The cyrillic alphabet
.It russian
Same as cyrillic.
.It ukrainian
Same as cyrillic.
.El

As indicated above, by default the cipher only processes the letter characters
in the primary alphabet selected with 
.Ar -alpha .
But to increase security and usability, it is possible to add a secondary
alphabet to complement the primary. These are the four numeric/symbol alphabets
that can be selected with the 
.Ar -num 
flag:

.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It N
(default) "None", just encrypt the letters in the primary alphabet.
.It A
"Arabic" numbers: 0123456789
.It H
"Hindi" numerals: ٠١٢٣٤٥٦٧٨٩
.It E
"Extended" comprises the "Arabic" numbers, space, and these: #$%+-@
.El

.Pp
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT      \" May not be needed
.\" .Bl -tag -width "ENV_VAR_1" -indent \" ENV_VAR_1 is width of the string ENV_VAR_1
.\" .It Ev ENV_VAR_1
.\" Description of ENV_VAR_1
.\" .It Ev ENV_VAR_2
.\" Description of ENV_VAR_2
.\" .El
.Sh FILES                \" File used or created by the topic of the man page
.Bl -tag -width "/Users/joeuser/Library/really_long_file_name" -compact
.It Pa /usr/bin/bellaso
Symbolic link to the caesarx application
.It Pa /usr/bin/caesarx
The actual application that supports all Caesar variants
.It Pa ~/.config/coralys/caesarx/caesarx.yml
User configuration file
.It Pa /usr/share/doc/caesarx/LICENSE.md 
The software license
.It Pa /usr/share/doc/caesarx/* 
All documentation
.El                      \" Ends the list
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS       \" May not be needed
.\" .Bl -diag
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .El
.Sh EXAMPLES
caesarx -variant didimus -alpha spanish -key M -offset 5 "El ñoño está con vergüenza"

didimus -key M -offset 5 -alpha german "Daß ist nicht wahr, es ist geöffnet"

didimus -key M -offset 5 -alpha spanish -d "Pé züzü pdül ñüy gpcrppófq"

cat "Pé züzü pdül ñüy gpcrppófq" | didimus -key M -offset 5 -alpha spanish -d

didimus -key M -offset 20 -num E -F plain_text_file.txt

.Sh SEE ALSO
.\" List links in ascending order by section, alphabetically within a section.
.\" Please do not reference files that do not exist without filing a bug report
.Xr caesarx 1 ,
.Xr tabularecta 1 ,
.Xr affine 1 ,
.Xr vigenere 1 ,
.Xr bellaso 1 ,
.Xr fibonacci 1 ,
.Xr caesarx 5
.\" .Sh BUGS              \" Document known, unremedied bugs
.Sh HISTORY           \" Document history if command behaves in a unique manner
.\" List application history
.Bl -tag -width -indent  \" Begins a tagged list
.It 27-Sep-2025                \" Each item preceded by .It macro
Initial version supporting multiple Caesar variants
.It 14-Oct-2025
Added support for Text file encryption/decryption
.It 25-Oct-2025
Added support for Binary file encryption/decryption
.El                      \" Ends the list
.Sh AUTHOR
Didimo Grimaldo <lordofscripts@users.noreply.github.com>

